Previously on "The 100"...
Clarke, on radio:
Carl Emerson,
I have a message
for your leader.
I will not
stop until my
people are free.
If you don't let
them go, I will
irradiate level 5.
We all have pain.
Some of it is physical.
It'll make it
go away.
Time to get
back to work, raven.
The city
of light is real.
And that's supposed to
take me to the city of light?
On your feet.
The grounders out there
will attack this camp.
We wait, we die.
This land is ours now.
Resist, and you will be
greeted by death.
Here we stand
on the brink
of another war,
a war you could stop.
Blood must not
have blood.
Mm...Mm...
Hey, hey, it's OK.
You're OK.
What were you
dreaming about?
Commanders
before me.
They speak to me
in my sleep.
I saw their deaths--
at war, at the hands
of an assassin.
It was just
a nightmare.
No. No.
It's a warning.
They think I'm
betraying their legacy.
Jus drein just daun
has always,
always been the way
of our people.
Listen to me.
A cease fire
is not a betrayal.
What you did
on that battlefield
stopped a war.
Your legacy
will be peace.
Oh, um, that's, um--
it's not finished yet.
Enter.
Pardon me, Heda.
I didn't realize
you were busy.
Are you going to tell me
what's in the box, or not?
Forgive me.
This is a gift from
king roan of Azgeda
for Wanheda.
The messenger said
this is both proof
of Azgeda's loyalty
to the coalition
and an answer to a
yet-unanswered question.
May I?
Open it.
Emerson.
Stop him!
Get him out of here!
Put him in a cage now!
I'm fine.
We done here?
10-meter draw,
and I'm good.
Pike's detail
is still at it--
soil and
water samples.
Any idea what
they're up to?
No, but considering how
heavily they're armed,
I don't think they want
anyone to find out.
- Crap.
- What?
There's a
grounder kid. Hang on.
Hello there.
Don't be scared.
We can't let him go.
He'll tell his
people he saw us.
Octavia,
please respond.
Hannah.
Fan out. With me.
Octavia, you there?
Huh!
They're going
after the kid.
I'm trying
to cut them off.
Split up.
Uh!
Shh shh shh shh shh.
We lost him.
Double back
towards the river.
He can't have
gotten far.
Mm.
Hey, hey...
You're welcome.
Ah...
- Kane.
- I'm here. You OK?
You need to find out
what pike is up to
right now.
Whatever it is,
they were willing
to kill a kid
to keep it quiet.
We're on it.
You stay safe.
How about now?
Anything?
Nope. All good.
Pain's gone.
Hmm, your leg's--
still doesn't work.
I know.
I just don't
hurt anymore.
Hey, hold on.
Pupils aren't dilated.
Jaha gave me the key
to the city of light,
Abby, not drugs.
Yeah. Let's see what
the blood tests say.
Thought you'd
be happy for me.
I am.
It's just unusual for pain
to subside this quickly.
Uh, so
am I all clear?
Apparently.
Let Sinclair know
that I said
it was OK for you
to go back to work,
but you're benched
again if I find
anything abnormal
in those tests.
You won't.
Thanks, doc.
You step aside in case
someone answers.
I told you,
no one's home.
What?
Bet you didn't
think we'd be
breaking the law
together when
this isn't
a game, Nate.
If we don't find out
what pike's up to,
more people
will die.
Then let's not
get caught.
Chancellor pike,
good to see you.
Hey, you put it somewhere
smart, out of sight.
I'll buy you
some time.
There you are.
We need to talk about these
things Jaha's distributing.
No, we don't. That's
Abby's department.
I have much more
immediate concerns.
Like the imprisoned
grounders?
Interned for their safety
as well as ours.
They came in
for our help.
If we're not gonna
give it to them,
They're a liability.
Let them go,
they'll tell their people
what they know about us--
our defenses and capabilities.
We're talking
about Lincoln here.
No. We're talking
about the enemy.
Not all grounders
are the enemy.
Kane, we've been
through this, all right?
The election
decided it.
Public opinion is
a funny thing, Charles.
My job is to keep us safe,
not to be liked.
Then keep up
the good work.
They seem
pretty happy.
Yeah.
They sure do.
A lot more of them
today, too.
I know
you're tempted,
but let me figure out
what it is first, OK?
OK. Let's get
this meeting started.
Welcome farm station's
own Monty green
and factory girl Zoe Monroe
as we begin our next
crucial phase--
expansion and salvation,
and this will lead the way.
Dirt?
Soil--fertile, arable soil,
vastly more rich than anything
we've found since landing.
We'll clear the trees
and plant within the month.
We start
with soybeans and corn.
They grow
the fastest.
What's wrong, Monty?
Don't like corn?
I've never had
corn, actually.
Is this where
we're going?
That's right.
There's
a village here.
What about the people
who live there?
Sector 4.
We talked about this.
The people there
are not a threat.
We need that land.
With the loss of mount
weather's resources,
Arkadia will be starving
in less than a year.
With all
due respect, sir,
you still haven't answered
Monty's question.
You know
the answer.
Every field must be
cleared of stones
before it's tilled.
We were
spotted by a child,
so they'll be
expecting us,
but they lost their fighters
when we took out the army.
We don't expect
resistance.
They're grounders.
They'll resist.
Even if they don't,
the commander's
message was clear.
Blood must not have blood.
That doesn't mean
we can start taking--
what would you
prefer,
die fighting
for your home
or starve to death?
Will you do what
needs to be done
for your people
to survive, or not?
We'll do what
needs to be done.
You're letting her
cloud your judgment at a time--
I thought you were
supposed to be loyal.
I am, but you are
too personally in--
here she is.
You wanted to
see me, commander?
Yes.
I need to discuss the fate
of the last Mountain man.
I believe he
deserves death.
She can speak
for herself, Titus.
Titus is right.
You see?
It is human nature
to need vengeance.
Only once satiated
can there be peace.
- That is our way.
- That was our way.
Clarke...
So blood must not
have blood applies
only when it is
my people who bleed.
That was about
stopping a war.
This is about
finishing one.
I'm sorry, but if
you want my advice,
I agree with Titus.
He deserves to die
for what he did.
I'm not looking for advice.
I'm looking for a decision.
He was gifted
to you.
Crime he stands
charged with
is against
your people.
So what will it be,
then, Clarke...
Banishment from
our lands forever
or death by 49 cuts
from your hand?
You have till sundown
to decide.
Oh, finally.
Where's my horse?
Outside. Nice
to see you, too.
Octavia, wait a second.
You actually think
that a bunch of grounders
are gonna give up their homes
because you asked them to?
If it's that or
be wiped out, maybe.
OK. Then what if
they don't leave?
Then we're leading
our people into an ambush.
Maybe if you just
talk to your brother--
my brother is on
the wrong side.
So, what, then,
we don't even try?
What do you
think happens
when Lexa finds out
that Skaikru
massacred another
grounder village?
War, more
dead friends.
Stop the attack,
stop a war.
Feeling better?
Better? I feel
incredible.
Thank you,
both of you.
Thanks you, raven.
More are joining
the city of light
because of you.
Anything I could
do to help.
What?
Now that you're back
on the engineering core--
uh, thanks to Alie--
we'd like you to do
a job for us.
Name it.
I've been looking for
something for a long time,
searching for it
in scavenged technology.
It's one of the reasons
we came to Arkadia first.
I believe that
version two of my code
is somewhere in the computer
system of the ark.
Why did there need
to be a version two?
Was there something
wrong with you?
Oh, nothing's
wrong with her.
No offense.
I'm just saying,
programmers
and engineers
generally don't go
to a version two
unless there is--
raven--
of course.
Of course
I'll help you,
but I got to say,
I'm fairly certain
if there was an AI
on the ark,
I would know.
It will likely be
a dormant program,
that or
an unfinished one.
If you can gain me
access to the mainframe,
I can search for
and download
any residual code.
Sounds like
a plan, red.
See you on
the other side.
Why would you not tell
her the truth about me?
John Murphy
knew the truth,
and we lost him,
remember?
John Murphy never saw
the city of light.
Call it an abundance
of caution, then.
We are, after all,
asking her to find
an upgrade for
a computer program
that ended the world.
That's a lot
of firepower.
Let's hope
we don't need it.
What's the mission?
Planning
for our future.
You know, that looks
a lot like our past.
We are building
a life here,
now trying to make peace
with a people
who only
understand war.
Damn right.
Hannah, you just
got your son back.
Don't send him
out there to die.
No one's dying today.
Now let's move out.
Hey, where the hell
have you been?
Oh, I lost
the damn horse.
Actually, the horse
lost me, but--
I'm glad you're OK.
I wish you didn't
have to go with them.
Today, Bryan.
Duty calls.
Yeah. Hey,
be careful, please.
All right.
AI nou na bash yo op.
Liar.
I've seen your face.
You were at the battle
of the Mountain.
Your guns killed
our brothers and sisters,
warriors sent
by the commander
to keep you safe.
I'm sorry
for your loss,
but I'm here to warn you
that the soldiers
who did that
are coming here now.
They want your land,
and they will kill
all of you to get it.
You need to leave
this place right now.
Are you
threatening us?
Uh! Ah!
Rrgh!
You're the one
who saved Gavriel?
Don't leave.
Couldn't have said something
before I got kicked in the face?
Chronic pain just doesn't
go away overnight.
The data
says it does.
Elevated levels of
serotonin and dopamine
in raven's blood
are consistent
with her claims,
and since it's
within normal
limits, I'd say
it's not
drug-induced.
You look
disappointed.
No. Surprised.
We've all been
through so much
that it's hard
to recognize hope,
even when it's right
in front of us.
Jackson,
can you go check
on the grounder
patients in lockup?
Report back
to me, OK?
Octavia should be
at the village by now,
but if she can't convince
them to evacuate--
you have done
everything you can.
No.
No, I haven't.
I let this happen.
I demanded
an election...
And now we have
chancellor pike.
We're on the brink
of a war we can't win,
and all I can do
to stop it
is send kids
into harm's way.
Hey, in case
you haven't noticed,
they're not kids
anymore.
With Clarke gone,
Bellamy's the key.
I've been trying
to reach him,
but pike's influence
is strong,
and he really
believes he's doing
the right thing.
Everybody
always does.
What was that?
Let's call it hope.
You can pet him
if you want.
Gavriel...
Go on.
His parents
were warriors,
both killed
by Skaikru guns.
You decided
to leave.
As you say, we're no
match for Skaikru.
What you're doing is as brave
as going to battle, Semet.
Uh! Agh! Ah!
Ah...Ah...
What is this?
You think you know us?
You know nothing, girl.
Rragh!
All set.
We just got to patch you in.
Can I ask you a question?
Why would the second
AI be in space?
My creator thought
she needed
a more secure
work environment.
So did you go, too?
No. I was
the reason
she wanted a more
secure environment.
She's in.
Who's in?
Jasper, you don't have
access to be down here.
Like that's
ever stopped me.
Is that Jaha's
backpack?
What do you want,
Jasper?
Came to apologize.
Might have stolen
Finn's ashes,
spread them
at the Dropship.
You're not...
Pissed?
I'm not pissed.
OK. What are you on,
and how
do I get some?
Simple.
I just decided
I'd suffered long enough.
So have you, Jasper.
If you're ready,
Jaha has the key.
Give us a minute.
Carl Emerson,
mount weather
security detail.
I've heard
what they call you now--
Wanheda,
commander of death.
I should've known
it was you
who told them how
to destroy the Mountain.
I didn't destroy
mount weather.
You did.
381 people--
182 men,
173 women,
26 children.
Two of them were mine.
Your president
gave us no choice.
Raagh! Guh!
What's the matter,
you don't like to be
faced with your demons?
If you want mercy,
you're gonna have
to ask me for it.
Ha ha ha!
I don't want mercy.
I want revenge.
I want you
to suffer
the same way
that I've suffered.
You can kill me, Clarke.
You can never escape
what you did.
My pain ends today!
Yours has just begun!
Titus, what are you
doing in my room?
You spend so much time
talking about peace,
I think it's time
we made peace
with each other,
don't you?
All right.
I appreciate the predicament
you're in, Clarke. I do.
After convincing Lexa
not to avenge the massacre
of our army, it must
be hard for you
to choose to take
your own revenge.
Perhaps now you realize
how difficult
this new policy will be
for our people to accept.
This has nothing to do
with what happened
to your army.
Emerson is guilty.
Wiping out my people
for the crimes of a few
is not justice.
Did you not
wipe out his people
for what a few of them
did to yours?
You're a leader, Clarke.
Lexa listens to you.
Help me to protect her.
Blood must not
have blood is folly.
Our people will not
accept it, and I fear--
I fear it will
get her killed.
I can't help you
do something
that leads to war
against my people.
Then we're
at an impasse.
Does it hurt?
He's ready.
Takes away pain.
It doesn't cause it.
What if--what if you
don't have physical pain,
and what if it's more--
it's more in your head?
Pain is pain.
Your scars
run deep, Jasper.
You only get scars
once you've healed.
I'll see you
on the other side.
Am I interrupting?
Not at all.
Please join us.
May I?
You seem to be
working miracles with these.
What is it?
And I don't want to hear
that it's a key.
Give me the science.
It's all right.
Tell her.
It's a silicon-based device.
Once ingested, the
filaments reconstitute
in the brain stem
and interrupt
pain receptors,
inhibiting certain
neural pathways
from firing.
Should've
stuck with key.
Ha ha!
Would you mind if I run
some trials on it?
I just want to make sure that
there aren't any side effects.
Would you have given it to Wells
without testing it first?
Wells?
Your son.
Yes.
Yes. Of course.
Jasper, I need
a minute, please.
Could I have
that back?
Now, please.
I'm shutting you down.
That's
not necessary.
Please, Abby,
it's been so long
since I've
thought of my son.
Huh. I'm sorry.
I'm not gonna let you
give this to anyone else
until I get a chance
to look at it.
I am only trying to
help eliminate pain,
same as you.
Whatever it is,
it's eliminating
more than just pain.
We cannot
let her stop us.
Don't worry,
Thelonious.
I'll keep
an eye on her.
Mm...
No.
Mm!
I don't hear
anything.
Maybe
no one's home.
Hello?
Anyone here?
Maybe they saw
our lights and left.
Mm...Uh!
- Uh!
- Yah!
Contact, two o'clock.
Bellamy! Get them
out of there!
It's a trap!
- Fire!
- Incoming! Take cover!
The smoke is poison!
Fall back. Fall back!
Stay away from the smoke.
Get back to the rover.
Monty! Help!
Let me go!
Please help me!
I have to save her.
- Monroe!
- Monty!
Stand down!
Fall back!
Hannah, come on!
Come on!
Monroe! Monroe!
Monroe!
Uh!
Monty!
Monty, come on.
We got to get her
away from the smoke.
How the hell
did they know?
Monroe?
- Monroe.
- No.
Your sister
did this.
How the hell
did she know?
We have traitors
in our camp.
Wanheda...
Vengeance is yours.
No.
I don't know if your death
would bring me peace.
I just know
I don't deserve it.
This man must die.
If Skaikru will not take
his life, then Heda will.
Heda will speak for herself.
Enough, Titus.
What the hell
is this?
I wouldn't be killing you
for what you've done.
I'd be killing you for
what I've done.
Wanheda knows this.
Her actions show us a promise
for a new future,
a world in which violence
does not always answer violence,
a world in which
our children can flourish
without the shadow
of death.
This prisoner is
banished from my land.
He will live,
but he will live
with the ghosts of
those he has lost,
haunted until
the end of his days
by the knowledge
that he
is the last
of his kind.
May you live forever.
You wanted
to see me, sir?
- How you holding up?
- I've been better.
Yeah. We all have.
We need to talk
about your sister.
Two of our people died
today because of her,
not to mention
the ash-poisoned soil,
making the land useless.
The grounders did that.
Octavia tried to warn them.
Yes, after
she warned them.
Someone in this camp is
giving her information.
I need to know who.
We both know who.
Kane.
We have no proof.
We need to find
me some.
Yes, sir.
You're dismissed.
Please listen to me, OK?
I don't know anything more
about Clarke, all right?
Listen. I don't
know anything.
Forget about Clarke.
Tell me about this.
We have some willing converts,
but no keys.
That's gonna be
a problem.
One problem at a time.
There's no trace
of Alie's code
or anything like it
on the ark.
You were sure.
I remain certain that
Becca went into space.
Unfortunately, it
appears that she wasn't
on any of
the 12 stations
that made up
the ark.
I'm sorry.
I know how important
it is to you to find that AI.
13.
13?
The ark was made up
of 12 stations--that's true--
but there were
supposed to be 13.
I didn't find that
on any of the data.
That's because
it was scrubbed.
Blowing a space station
out of the sky
to get others to join
isn't exactly
an inspirational
unity day story.
No. Hold on. Hold on.
Wait, wait. Just listen
to me, OK? Listen.
Aagh! Aah!
Tell me more.
I wish I could.
All I know is that
it happened...
- Yah!
- Ah!
Yaah!
That it was
called Polaris.
Agh! Aah!